In this video, we'll
learn about the queue.
The queue is a first-in,
first-out data structure.
Like the stack, the queue is an adapter
class because it's implemented in terms
of already existing STL containers.
Since operations on the queue
happen on both ends, the front and
the back, we can easily implement
a queue based on any container
that has a front and the back.
These are the list and the deque.
So, the queue methods use
delegation, and call the methods
of the underlying container.
Like stacks, queues have wide
applications in computer science.
And the STL provides a simple
concise implementation.
You can think of a queue as a
waiting line, elements enter on one
end and are removed from the other.
As with stacks, iterators really
don't make sense with queues
and they're not supported.
So, we can't use the
STL algorithms either.
In order to use the queue containers,
we must include the queue header file.
Like the stack, the queue provides
a handful of methods that have
very well-defined behavior.
The push method inserts an
element at the back of the queue.
The pop method removes an element
from the front of the queue.
The front and back methods access
the front and back elements of the
queue, but does not remove them.
Finally, we have the empty and
size methods that we've seen
with the other containers.
Since the queue is an adapter
class, we can choose what
underlying container will be used.
Same thing we did with the stack.
In the first example, I'm
providing no information about
the underlying container, so the
STL will use a deque by default.
You can see in the next two
examples that I'm explicitly
stating which underlying container
to use as the template parameter.
Now let's see how the
push method works.
Suppose we have a queue of
integers named q and it's empty.
When we push 10 onto the queue, we
add 10 to the back of the queue.
In this case, the queue was empty.
So, 10 is both the back and
the front element in the queue.
Then when we push 20, we push
it at the back of the queue.
So, now 10 is at the front of the queue
and 20 is at the back of the queue.
You can see the front of the queue
is the shaded box in the diagrams.
The back of the queue is the other end.
We then push 30 at
the back of the queue.
Once we have a queue that contains
elements, we can access the
elements at the front and at
the back without removing them
with the front and back methods.
In this example, q.front will display
10, and q.back will display 30.
Now when we pop elements from the
queue, they're removed from the front.
The first q.pop removes the 10 from
the front of the queue, and now 20
becomes the new front of the queue.
The second q.pop removes the 20 from
the front of the queue, and now 30
becomes the new front of the queue.
If we call the size method for the
queue here, we'll display 1 since
there's one element in the queue.
As you can see the queue is really
a very simple data structure
but like the stack, it's used
extensively in computer science
to solve many types of problems.
So, let's head over to the ide.
And we'll see some q examples.
Okay, so I'm back in the ide.
I'm in the section 20 workspace.
And I'm in the queue project.
And just like the stack, the
queue is really, really, simple.
So, let's go over some
of these examples.
First thing you'll see is I've already
got the run over here on the right and
I'll discuss that in just a second.
First thing you'll see is I've
got this template function that
displays the queue very similar
to what we did with the stack.
In this case, I'm passing by
value because I don't want a
reference to the real queue.
And I don't want to destroy it.
So, this is going to make a copy
of the cube that's passed in, and
that's the one I'm going to process.
So, how do I display this?
Well, while the queue is
not empty, I'm going to get
the element from the front.
Remember with the queue, we push on
the back, and we pop from the front.
So, this is first-in, first-out.
Alright, so it's like a waiting line.
Someone gets in at the back
of the line, they come off
in the front of the line.
So, I'm getting the
element from the front.
I'm removing it from the queue.
I'm displaying it.
That's it, really, really, simple.
Okay, so let's talk about main again.
There's only one test
here right in my main.
First thing I'm doing is I'm
creating a queue right here
and it's a queue of integers.
Again this could be just
about any type and I'm pushing
1,2,3,4 and 5 onto the queue.
Now remember I'm pushing at
the back, so when I push 1.
I'm pushing it at the back.
Then 2, then 3, then 4, then 5.
I display the queue. And this is
what I'm getting right here.
Now what's the front, what's the back?
Let's be sure that we
understand what's going on here.
We can say q.front, q.back,
and you can see that the front
here is the one, makes sense.
It's the first one that I pushed on.
First customer in line is the
first customer out of the line.
So, that's the front,
the back is the 5.
Now I want to push a 100
onto the back of the queue,
and display the queue again.
And you can see the output right
here, you can see the 100 here
is at the back of the queue.
I want to pop two elements
from the front of the queue.
So, what happens is the 1
and the 2 get removed from
the front, and they're gone.
So, now what's left
is 3,4, 5, and a 100.
Three is at the front,
100 is at the back.
If I want to remove everything
from the queue, I need to use
some sort of loop like this.
We can't use iterators with the queues.
So, while the queue is not empty,
pop the front element out of there.
And when I'm done, it'll be
empty, and I display the queue.
And I will get an empty queue
just like you see right there.
When I display the size of
that queue, I'm right here.
It's down line 42, I will get a
zero because it's empty right now.
And let me just clear
this and I'll scroll up.
And there's a few more
lines, not too many.
So, we're right here, we're on line 44.
I've got an empty queue at this point,
I just printed out the size right here.
So, I'm going to push 10,
100 and then a 1000 onto the
queue, and display the queue.
There you go. You can see 10 is at the
front, 1000 is at the back.
And you can see that that
being displayed right here.
10 is at the front,
1000 is at the back.
Now I have access to
the front and the back.
The front method and the back
method return references.
So, if I wanted to change the
front or change the back, I can.
So, in this case, I'm setting
whatever element it is at the
front to 5 and at the back to 5000.
You can see them change right there.
Right, they were 10, now it's
5 was the 1000, now it's 5000.
And you can see again that the
front of the queue is the 5 and
the back of the queue is the 5000.
So, that's it in a
nutshell, that's the queue.
So, remember this is first-in,
first-out as opposed to the stack
which was the last-in, first-out.
And there's uses for all of
these first-in, first-out
queues are used all the time for
scheduling, job scheduling, task
scheduling, and operating systems.
Stacks are used a lot in compiling.
They're used a lot to solve
problems where you have to calculate
expressions, and you have to figure
out how many parentheses are there?
Do they balance and things like that?
Okay, so, that's it.
In the next video, what we'll do
is we'll do a challenge that's
going to use stacks and queues.
And remember that palindrome example,
we did a while back with the deque.
We're going to do the same thing
except we're going to use a
stack and a queue to solve it.